Eck 3.4.0 release (#5838)
elastic/docs-content: deploy-manage/deploy/cloud-on-k8s/nodes-orchestration.md

* [StatefulSets orchestration](#k8s-statefulsets)
* [Limitations](#k8s-orchestration-limitations)
* [Advanced control during rolling upgrades](#k8s-advanced-upgrade-control)

> * [Cluster Rolling Restart](#cluster-rolling-restart)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Cluster rolling restarts](#cluster-rolling-restart)
```

Author: changed in 442db7926d822c5218df366a641e4c49a732b7d8

* These predicates might change in the future. We will be adding, removing, and renaming these over time, so be careful in adding these to any automation.
* Also, make sure you remove them after use by running `kublectl annotate elasticsearch.elasticsearch.k8s.elastic.co/elasticsearch-sample eck.k8s.elastic.co/disable-upgrade-predicates-`
::::

## Cluster Rolling Restart [cluster-rolling-restart]

```{applies_to}
eck: ga 3.4.0
```

> You can trigger a graceful rolling restart of an {{es}} cluster without changing the cluster spec (version, image, or pod template). The operator reuses the same rolling upgrade path: it uses the {{es}} node shutdown API, respects the same [ECK upgrade predicates](cloud-on-k8s://reference/upgrade-predicates.md), and restarts one node at a time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can trigger a graceful rolling restart of an {{es}} cluster without changing the cluster spec. The operator reuses the same rolling upgrade path: it uses the {{es}} node shutdown API, respects the same [ECK upgrade predicates](cloud-on-k8s://reference/upgrade-predicates.md), and restarts one node at a time.
```

Author: changed in 442db7926d822c5218df366a641e4c49a732b7d8

> ### Annotations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Trigger a rolling restart
```

Author: changed in 442db7926d822c5218df366a641e4c49a732b7d8

Set these annotations on the `Elasticsearch` resource metadata:

| Annotation | Description |
|------------|-------------|
| `eck.k8s.elastic.co/restart-trigger` | **Required to trigger.** Set or change this value (for example to a timestamp) to start a rolling restart. The value is propagated to pod annotations and is visible in the {{es}} node shutdown API response as the shutdown reason. |

> 

Reviewer: why do you suggest a timestamp?

```suggestion
To schedule a rolling restart, set a `eck.k8s.elastic.co/restart-trigger` annotation on the `Elasticsearch` resource metadata.

Set or change this value to start a rolling restart. The value is propagated to pod annotations and is visible in the {{es}} node shutdown API response as the shutdown reason.

```

Author: I am not suggesting anything, here is me trying to merge the 3.4.0 ECK branch to main. The change you are referring to is already reviewed and approved [here](https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/5492/changes). Either way changed to your proposal in 442db7926d822c5218df366a641e4c49a732b7d8

You can also set the [`eck.k8s.elastic.co/restart-allocation-delay`](#restart-allocation-delay) annotation to control the shard allocation delay during the restart.

> To trigger another rolling restart later, update the `restart-trigger` value (for example to a new timestamp). Removing the annotation does **not** trigger a new restart; the operator retains the last trigger value on the pod template. Removing the annotation also does **not** cancel an in-progress rolling restart—pods not yet restarted will still be restarted with the previous trigger value. The operator may emit an admission webhook warning (non-blocking) when you remove the annotation. Re-applying the same `restart-trigger` value (for example after removing it and setting it again) may not trigger a new rolling restart if all pods already have that value; the operator may emit an admission webhook warning when the value is unchanged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To trigger another rolling restart later, update the `restart-trigger` value. 

Rolling restart progress is visible in the {{es}} resource status under **In Progress Operations** → **Upgrade**, with node-level messages such as "Deleting pod for rolling restart".

### Behavior

Keep the following behaviors in mind when working with the `restart-trigger` annotation:

* Removing the annotation does not trigger a new restart. The operator retains the last trigger value on the pod template.
* Removing the annotation does not cancel an in-progress restart. Pods not yet restarted will still restart with the previous trigger value.
* Re-applying the same value might not trigger a new restart if all pods already have that value.
* The operator may emit a non-blocking admission webhook warning when the annotation is removed or set to an unchanged value.
```

Author: changed in 442db7926d822c5218df366a641e4c49a732b7d8

> ### Example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example

In the following example, a timestamp trigger is used as the restart-trigger value. This value is visible in the {{es}} node shutdown API response as the shutdown reason.
```

Author: changed in 442db7926d822c5218df366a641e4c49a732b7d8

```yaml subs=true
apiVersion: elasticsearch.k8s.elastic.co/v1
kind: Elasticsearch
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
  annotations:
    eck.k8s.elastic.co/restart-trigger: "2026-01-14T12:00:00Z"
spec:
  version: {{version.stack}}
  nodeSets:
    - name: default
      count: 3
      config:
        node.roles: ["master", "data", "ingest", "ml"]
        node.store.allow_mmap: false
```

> Progress is visible in the {{es}} resource status under **In Progress Operations** → **Upgrade**, with node-level messages such as "Deleting pod for rolling restart".

Reviewer: I'd move this up 

```suggestion
```

Author: moved up in 442db7926d822c5218df366a641e4c49a732b7d8

## Restart allocation delay [restart-allocation-delay]

```{applies_to}
eck: ga 3.4.0
```

> The `eck.k8s.elastic.co/restart-allocation-delay` annotation controls the `allocation_delay` parameter passed to the {{es}} node shutdown API when nodes are taken offline. Any value set on this annotation is used during both **upgrades** and **custom triggered [rolling restarts](#cluster-rolling-restart)**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `eck.k8s.elastic.co/restart-allocation-delay` annotation controls the `allocation_delay` parameter passed to the {{es}} node shutdown API when nodes are taken offline. Any value set on this annotation is used during both upgrades and custom triggered [rolling restarts](#cluster-rolling-restart).
```

Author: changed in 442db7926d822c5218df366a641e4c49a732b7d8

Set this annotation on the `Elasticsearch` resource metadata:

| Annotation | Description |
|------------|-------------|

> | `eck.k8s.elastic.co/restart-allocation-delay` | Optional. A duration string (for example `"5m"`, `"20m"`) that tells {{es}} how long to wait before reallocating shards from a node that is shutting down. If unset, the {{es}} default is used. Invalid or negative values are logged and ignored. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`eck.k8s.elastic.co/restart-allocation-delay` accepts a duration string such as `"5m"`, `"20m"`, that tells {{es}} how long to wait before reallocating shards from a node that is shutting down. If unset, the {{es}} default is used. Invalid or negative values are logged and ignored. 
```

By default, when a node begins shutting down, {{es}} waits a short period before it starts moving shards to other nodes. Setting a longer `allocation_delay` avoids unnecessary shard movements during planned restarts where the node is expected to return quickly. Setting a shorter value causes {{es}} to start rebalancing sooner, which can be useful if the restart is expected to take a long time.

### Example

```yaml subs=true
apiVersion: elasticsearch.k8s.elastic.co/v1
kind: Elasticsearch
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
  annotations:
    eck.k8s.elastic.co/restart-allocation-delay: "20m"
spec:
  version: {{version.stack}}
  nodeSets:
    - name: default
      count: 3
      config:
        node.roles: ["master", "data", "ingest", "ml"]
        node.store.allow_mmap: false
```

> In this example the 20-minute delay applies whenever ECK restarts a node, whether the restart is part of a version upgrade, a spec change, or a manually triggered rolling restart initiated by `eck.k8s.elastic.co/restart-trigger`.

Reviewer: I don't think we need to restate this

```suggestion
```

Author: removed in 442db7926d822c5218df366a641e4c49a732b7d8
